pascal_notes-and-examples.adoc, before:

= Object Pascal: A Collection of Notes and Examples 
:revnumber: 2019.03
:revmark: First issue
:author: William Hunter
:email: whunter.za@gmail.com
:doctype: book
// Generate a table of contents
:toc:
:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 4
:reproducible:
:rouge-linenums-mode: table
:source-highlighter: rouge
:listing-caption: Listing
// Uncomment next line to set page size (default is A4)
//:pdf-page-size: Letter


== Introduction
This document focusses on the use of Free Pascal and therefore the Free Pascal Compiler (FPC) and its spinoffs (notably,
the Lazarus IDE). The examples and snippets is mostly a collection of various sources from the internet and other sources,
stuff that I find useful. Therefore, there are Delphi related info in here as well.

== Books and other references
A lot (almost all) of the information, notes and examples in this document are from these resources:

=== Books
. The excellent introductory book by Howard Page-Clark
. Marco Cantu's book on Object Pascal
. Chris Rolliston's books on Delphi XE2

=== Online resources
. https://www.freepascal.org/docs-html/current/ref/ref.html[Free Pascal Reference Guide]
. Free Pascal and Lazarus wiki pages
. http://www.delphibasics.co.uk[Delphi Basics]


== The basics and minimal examples
=== Installing FPC and Lazarus IDE
They can be installed independantly, or just install the Lazarus IDE (FPC is included).

=== How to compile a program using the command line
Simply type
[source, console]
----
fpc program.pp
----
The file extension can be +.pp+ or +.pas+.

You can leave out the extension in the command, in which case the above becomes:
[source, console]
----
fpc program
----

For further details, refer to the Free Pascal User's Guide (Chapter 3 at the time of writing): https://www.freepascal.org/docs.html

[[lnk-minimal]]
=== A minimal program
You require at least the following.

.A program that will compile, but will do nothing
[source, pascal]
----
program minimal;

begin
  // this is a comment
  // filename is minimal.pas or minimal.pp  
end.
----

=== Hello, World!
Some code that does something (see <<lnk-minimal>> for the bare minimum that is required for a valid pascal program).
Here's how you say "`Hello, World!`" in Object Pascal:

.A basic "`Hello, World!`" in Pascal
[source, pascal, numbered]
----
{
  filename: helloworld.pas

  comments can also be inside curly brackets, like this block
  use 2 spaces to indent
}

program helloworld;

{$mode objfpc}{$H+} // compiler directive for Free Pascal Compiler

begin
  writeln('Hello, World!');
  writeln('Press Enter to continue');
  readln(); // required for Windows cmd to avoid it from disappearing
end.
----

=== Hello, Console!
Just a variation on the above, and introduces a line break.
[source, pascal, numbered]
----
program helloconsole;

{$mode objfpc}{$H+}

uses {$IFDEF UNIX} {$IFDEF UseCThreads}
  cthreads, {$ENDIF} {$ENDIF}
  Classes { you can add units after this };

var
  strMessage: string;

begin
  strMessage := 'Hello, Console!';
  WriteLn(strMessage + sLineBreak + '<Press Enter to exit>');
  ReadLn;
end.
----

== Programs and units
A Pascal program can consist of modules called units. A unit can be used to group pieces of code together, or to give someone code
without giving the sources. Both programs and units consist of code blocks, which are mixtures of statements, procedures, and
variable or type declarations.

=== A minimal unit
A unit contains a set of declarations, procedures and functions that can be used by a program or another unit.
Below is an example of a minimal unit (filename +a.pas+ or +a.pp+):

[source, pascal]
----
unit minimal;  
 
interface  
 
implementation  
 
end.
----

=== A complete general unit
Below is an example of a unit with all possible sections (including optional ones). From Marco Cantu's website.

[source, pascal]
----
unit complete;  
 
interface  

// other units we need to refer to
uses
  A, B, C;

// exported type definition
type
  newType = TypeDefinition;

// exported constants
const
  Zero = 0;

// global variables
var
  Total: Integer;

// list of exported functions and procedures
procedure MyProc;

implementation  

uses
  D, E;

// hidden global variable
var
  PartialTotal: Integer;

// all the exported functions must be coded
procedure MyProc;
begin
  // ... code of procedure MyProc
end;

initialization
  // optional initialization part

finalization
  // optional clean-up code

end.
----

=== A program with units
A program that makes use of two units.

==== aprogram.lpr (the main program)
[source, pascal]
----
program aProgram;

{$mode objfpc}{$H+}

uses
  aUnit, otherUnit;

begin
  aUnit.DoSomething; // defined in aUnit.pas
  DoAnotherThing; // also defined in aUnit.pas
  otherUnit.DoSomething; // defined in otherUnit.pas
end.
----

==== aunit.pas (a unit)
[source, pascal]
----
unit aUnit;

interface

procedure DoSomething;
procedure DoAnotherThing;

implementation

procedure DoSomething;
begin
  writeln('I did something!');
  readln;
end;

procedure DoAnotherThing;
begin
  writeln('I did another thing!');
  readln;
end;

end.    
----

==== otherunit.pas (the other unit)
[source, pascal]
----
unit otherUnit;

interface

procedure DoSomething;

implementation

procedure DoSomething;
begin
  writeln('I did something from another Unit!');
  readln;
end;

end.     
----

If compiled and run, you should get:
[source, console]
----
I did something!

I did another thing!

I did something from another Unit!
----

== Classes and objects
A class is user-defined type, it describes the behaviour and characteristics of a group of
similar objects by means of internal methods (functions and procedures) and other data
(fields and attributes, which are really just variables inside (part of) the class).

An object is simply an instance (a single occurrence) of the class.

The relationship between an object and a class is the same the relationship between a
variable and a type. So, if you need a specific type of variable that behaves in a certain
way and has certain characteristics, and it is not available as a 'standard' type, you
simply have to create a class to have instances (or objects) that gives you the desired
behaviour/data.

=== A simple example of a class
Below is a simple definition of a class. Note that the implementation of the method
(in this case, a procedure called Square) is outside the class definition. The class
definition only includes the method prototypes (definitions), not the actual implementation.
This is for easier readability of the class definition.

[source, pascal, numbered]
----
type
  TCalculator = class
    number: longint; // note that the "var" keyword is not required inside a class
    function Square(val: longint): longint;
  end;

  function TCalculator.Square(val: longint): longint;
  begin
    Result := val * val;
  end;
----

==== How to use classes
Take the class example of above and use it in a small program.

[source, pascal]
----
program UseAClass;

{$mode objfpc}{$H+}

uses
  SysUtils { you can add units after this };

type
  TCalculator = class
    number: longint; // note that the "var" keyword is not required inside a class
    function Square(val: longint): longint;
  end;

  function TCalculator.Square(val: longint): longint;
  begin
    Result := val * val;
  end;

var
  Calc: TCalculator; // a new variable of type TCalculator
  num: longint;

begin
  Calc.Create;
  num := 9;
  WriteLn('The square of ' + IntToStr(num) + ' = ' + IntToStr(Calc.Square(num)) +
    ' <Answer should = 81, press Enter to exit>');
  Calc.Free;
  ReadLn;
end. 
----



=== A program with a class defined in a unit
To be completed...

=== A more complicated example
A drawing object class...

[source, pascal, numbered]
----
Program Shapes;
 
Type
   DrawingObject = Class
      x, y : single;
      height, width : double;
      procedure Draw; // procedure declared in here
   end;
 
  procedure DrawingObject.Draw;
  begin
       writeln('Drawing an Object');
       writeln(' x = ', x, ' y = ', y); // object fields
       writeln(' width = ', width);
       writeln(' height = ', height);
       Writeln;
  end;
 
Var
  Rectangle : DrawingObject; // a new variable of type DrawingObject
 
begin
  Rectangle.x := 50;  //  the fields specific to the variable "Rectangle"
  Rectangle.y := 100;
  Rectangle.width := 60;
  Rectangle.height := 40;
 
  writeln('x = ', Rectangle.x);
 
  Rectangle.Draw; // Calling the method (procedure)
 
  with Rectangle do // With works the same way even with the method (procedure) field
   begin
       x:= 75;
       Draw;
   end;
end.
----

=== An even more complicated example
To be completed...

== Syntax, code style and file types

=== Case sensitivity
Pascal code is not case sensitive. Whilst this does not make a difference on Windows
platforms, you can potentially run into problems on Linux and Mac if you start mixing
case, because the latter two are case sensitive (unlike Windows).

==== Coding style and syntax
. http://wiki.freepascal.org/Coding_style
. http://jvcl.delphi-jedi.org/StyleGuide.htm
. http://edn.embarcadero.com/article/10280

=== File types
As applicable to Free Pascal (FP) and the Lazarus IDE. It is a good idea to use lower
case and no spaces in file names, for cross-platform compatibility.

==== File extensions
The following file types are usually required to be part of your VCS
(Version Control System), depending on your development platform.

[cols="15,85"]
|=== 
| *Extension* | *Description*
|.pas | Pascal source code file
|.pp | Pascal source code file (useful if you want to avoid confusion with Delphi source code files). You can set this in the IDE.
|.lfm | Lazarus form source file. Analogous to Delphi's dfm files.
|.lpi | Lazarus project information file. Created by Lazarus for every new project.
|.lpr | Lazarus program (or project) file. The source code of the main program. Analogous to Delphi's dpr project file.
|.rc | A Windows resource file (not binary)
|.ico | The main project icon in Windows icon format
|.manifest | Windows-specific manifest file for themes
|=== 

The following files are typically not added to your VCS.
[cols="15,85"]
|=== 
| *Extension*| *Description*
| .lps| Lazarus project settings file. Created by Lazarus for every new project.
| .lrs| Lazarus resource file.
| .compiled| FPC compilation state
| .o| Object file
| .or| Object file
| .ppu| A compiled Unit file
| .res| The result of compiling the rc file (binary)
| .rst| Compiled resource strings. Used for L10n. If you intend to translate an application, this should probably be version controlled
|===

== Settings (configuration)
To be completed...

// create PDF by running asciidoctor-pdf filename.adoc


== Asciidoc snippets (not part of this document)
This document iss typeset using http://asciidoc.org[AsciiDoc].
There are some snippets I may want to use later on this page, nothing to do with Object Pascal.

A paragraph followed by a simple list with square bullets.

.A bulleted list (square bullets)
[square]
* item
* item 

//-

.Another list
* item 
* item 
** item 
** item
- item
- item

.Start the below list numbered from 88
[start=88]
. Step four
. Step five
. Step six

Hard drive:: Permanent storage for operating system and/or user files
RAM:: Temporarily stores information the CPU uses during operation
Monitor:: Displays information in visual form using text and graphics

.Another list
. something
. something
.. something
... something
. something
 
.Topic Title                                               
[[yourId]]                                                 
//[yourstyle]                                                
____
Example of a quote and using cross-references.
____
You refer to the above by referencing <<yourId>>.

ifdef::env-github[]
:tip-caption: :bulb:
:note-caption: :information_source:
:important-caption: :heavy_exclamation_mark:
:caution-caption: :fire:
:warning-caption: :warning:
endif::[]

[NOTE]
====
A sample note admonition.
We can use gemoji icons in the Asciidoctor markup.
We assign an icon name to the document
attributes `tip-caption`, `note-caption` and `important-caption`.
====

CAUTION: Don't forget to add the `...-caption` document attributes in the header of the document on GitHub.

TIP: It works!

IMPORTANT: Asciidoctor is awesome, don't forget!

WARNING: You have no reason not to use Asciidoctor.

Commit message:

added minimal.pp to source directory

pascal_notes-and-examples.adoc, after:

= Object Pascal: A Collection of Notes and Examples 
:revnumber: 2019.03
:revmark: First issue
:author: William Hunter
:email: whunter.za@gmail.com
:doctype: book
// Generate a table of contents
:toc:
:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 4
:reproducible:
:rouge-linenums-mode: table
:source-highlighter: rouge
:listing-caption: Listing
// Uncomment next line to set page size (default is A4)
//:pdf-page-size: Letter


== Introduction
This document focusses on the use of Free Pascal and therefore the Free Pascal Compiler (FPC) and its spinoffs (notably,
the Lazarus IDE). The examples and snippets is mostly a collection of various sources from the internet and other sources,
stuff that I find useful. Therefore, there are Delphi related info in here as well.

== Books and other references
A lot (almost all) of the information, notes and examples in this document are from these resources:

=== Books
. The excellent introductory book by Howard Page-Clark
. Marco Cantu's book on Object Pascal
. Chris Rolliston's books on Delphi XE2

=== Online resources
. https://www.freepascal.org/docs-html/current/ref/ref.html[Free Pascal Reference Guide]
. Free Pascal and Lazarus wiki pages
. http://www.delphibasics.co.uk[Delphi Basics]


== The basics and minimal examples
=== Installing FPC and Lazarus IDE
They can be installed independantly, or just install the Lazarus IDE (FPC is included).

=== How to compile a program using the command line
Simply type
[source, console]
----
fpc program.pp
----
The file extension can be +.pp+ or +.pas+.

You can leave out the extension in the command, in which case the above becomes:
[source, console]
----
fpc program
----

For further details, refer to the Free Pascal User's Guide (Chapter 3 at the time of writing): https://www.freepascal.org/docs.html

[[lnk-minimal]]
=== A minimal program
You require at least the following.

.A program that will compile, but will do nothing
[source, pascal]
----
program minimal;

begin
  // this is a comment
  // filename is minimal.pas or minimal.pp  
end.
----

If you compile the above, you'll end up with the following two files in the same direcory
(in addition to the +minimal.pp+ (or +minimal.pas+)) on a Windows machine:
[source, console]
----
minimal.exe
minimal.o
----

=== Hello, World!
Some code that does something (see <<lnk-minimal>> for the bare minimum that is required for a valid pascal program).
Here's how you say "`Hello, World!`" in Object Pascal:

.A basic "`Hello, World!`" in Pascal
[source, pascal, numbered]
----
{
  filename: helloworld.pas

  comments can also be inside curly brackets, like this block
  use 2 spaces to indent
}

program helloworld;

{$mode objfpc}{$H+} // compiler directive for Free Pascal Compiler

begin
  writeln('Hello, World!');
  writeln('Press Enter to continue');
  readln(); // required for Windows cmd to avoid it from disappearing
end.
----

=== Hello, Console!
Just a variation on the above, and introduces a line break.
[source, pascal, numbered]
----
program helloconsole;

{$mode objfpc}{$H+}

uses {$IFDEF UNIX} {$IFDEF UseCThreads}
  cthreads, {$ENDIF} {$ENDIF}
  Classes { you can add units after this };

var
  strMessage: string;

begin
  strMessage := 'Hello, Console!';
  WriteLn(strMessage + sLineBreak + '<Press Enter to exit>');
  ReadLn;
end.
----

== Programs and units
A Pascal program can consist of modules called units. A unit can be used to group pieces of code together, or to give someone code
without giving the sources. Both programs and units consist of code blocks, which are mixtures of statements, procedures, and
variable or type declarations.

=== A minimal unit
A unit contains a set of declarations, procedures and functions that can be used by a program or another unit.
Below is an example of a minimal unit (filename +a.pas+ or +a.pp+):

[source, pascal]
----
unit minimal;  
 
interface  
 
implementation  
 
end.
----

=== A complete general unit
Below is an example of a unit with all possible sections (including optional ones). From Marco Cantu's website.

[source, pascal]
----
unit complete;  
 
interface  

// other units we need to refer to
uses
  A, B, C;

// exported type definition
type
  newType = TypeDefinition;

// exported constants
const
  Zero = 0;

// global variables
var
  Total: Integer;

// list of exported functions and procedures
procedure MyProc;

implementation  

uses
  D, E;

// hidden global variable
var
  PartialTotal: Integer;

// all the exported functions must be coded
procedure MyProc;
begin
  // ... code of procedure MyProc
end;

initialization
  // optional initialization part

finalization
  // optional clean-up code

end.
----

=== A program with units
A program that makes use of two units.

==== aprogram.lpr (the main program)
[source, pascal]
----
program aProgram;

{$mode objfpc}{$H+}

uses
  aUnit, otherUnit;

begin
  aUnit.DoSomething; // defined in aUnit.pas
  DoAnotherThing; // also defined in aUnit.pas
  otherUnit.DoSomething; // defined in otherUnit.pas
end.
----

==== aunit.pas (a unit)
[source, pascal]
----
unit aUnit;

interface

procedure DoSomething;
procedure DoAnotherThing;

implementation

procedure DoSomething;
begin
  writeln('I did something!');
  readln;
end;

procedure DoAnotherThing;
begin
  writeln('I did another thing!');
  readln;
end;

end.    
----

==== otherunit.pas (the other unit)
[source, pascal]
----
unit otherUnit;

interface

procedure DoSomething;

implementation

procedure DoSomething;
begin
  writeln('I did something from another Unit!');
  readln;
end;

end.     
----

If compiled and run, you should get:
[source, console]
----
I did something!

I did another thing!

I did something from another Unit!
----

== Classes and objects
A class is user-defined type, it describes the behaviour and characteristics of a group of
similar objects by means of internal methods (functions and procedures) and other data
(fields and attributes, which are really just variables inside (part of) the class).

An object is simply an instance (a single occurrence) of the class.

The relationship between an object and a class is the same the relationship between a
variable and a type. So, if you need a specific type of variable that behaves in a certain
way and has certain characteristics, and it is not available as a 'standard' type, you
simply have to create a class to have instances (or objects) that gives you the desired
behaviour/data.

=== A simple example of a class
Below is a simple definition of a class. Note that the implementation of the method
(in this case, a procedure called Square) is outside the class definition. The class
definition only includes the method prototypes (definitions), not the actual implementation.
This is for easier readability of the class definition.

[source, pascal, numbered]
----
type
  TCalculator = class
    number: longint; // note that the "var" keyword is not required inside a class
    function Square(val: longint): longint;
  end;

  function TCalculator.Square(val: longint): longint;
  begin
    Result := val * val;
  end;
----

==== How to use classes
Take the class example of above and use it in a small program.

[source, pascal]
----
program UseAClass;

{$mode objfpc}{$H+}

uses
  SysUtils { you can add units after this };

type
  TCalculator = class
    number: longint; // note that the "var" keyword is not required inside a class
    function Square(val: longint): longint;
  end;

  function TCalculator.Square(val: longint): longint;
  begin
    Result := val * val;
  end;

var
  Calc: TCalculator; // a new variable of type TCalculator
  num: longint;

begin
  Calc.Create;
  num := 9;
  WriteLn('The square of ' + IntToStr(num) + ' = ' + IntToStr(Calc.Square(num)) +
    ' <Answer should = 81, press Enter to exit>');
  Calc.Free;
  ReadLn;
end. 
----



=== A program with a class defined in a unit
To be completed...

=== A more complicated example
A drawing object class...

[source, pascal, numbered]
----
Program Shapes;
 
Type
   DrawingObject = Class
      x, y : single;
      height, width : double;
      procedure Draw; // procedure declared in here
   end;
 
  procedure DrawingObject.Draw;
  begin
       writeln('Drawing an Object');
       writeln(' x = ', x, ' y = ', y); // object fields
       writeln(' width = ', width);
       writeln(' height = ', height);
       Writeln;
  end;
 
Var
  Rectangle : DrawingObject; // a new variable of type DrawingObject
 
begin
  Rectangle.x := 50;  //  the fields specific to the variable "Rectangle"
  Rectangle.y := 100;
  Rectangle.width := 60;
  Rectangle.height := 40;
 
  writeln('x = ', Rectangle.x);
 
  Rectangle.Draw; // Calling the method (procedure)
 
  with Rectangle do // With works the same way even with the method (procedure) field
   begin
       x:= 75;
       Draw;
   end;
end.
----

=== An even more complicated example
To be completed...

== Syntax, code style and file types

=== Case sensitivity
Pascal code is not case sensitive. Whilst this does not make a difference on Windows
platforms, you can potentially run into problems on Linux and Mac if you start mixing
case, because the latter two are case sensitive (unlike Windows).

==== Coding style and syntax
. http://wiki.freepascal.org/Coding_style
. http://jvcl.delphi-jedi.org/StyleGuide.htm
. http://edn.embarcadero.com/article/10280

=== File types
As applicable to Free Pascal (FP) and the Lazarus IDE. It is a good idea to use lower
case and no spaces in file names, for cross-platform compatibility.

==== File extensions
The following file types are usually required to be part of your VCS
(Version Control System), depending on your development platform.

[cols="15,85"]
|=== 
| *Extension* | *Description*
|.pas | Pascal source code file
|.pp | Pascal source code file (useful if you want to avoid confusion with Delphi source code files). You can set this in the IDE.
|.lfm | Lazarus form source file. Analogous to Delphi's dfm files.
|.lpi | Lazarus project information file. Created by Lazarus for every new project.
|.lpr | Lazarus program (or project) file. The source code of the main program. Analogous to Delphi's dpr project file.
|.rc | A Windows resource file (not binary)
|.ico | The main project icon in Windows icon format
|.manifest | Windows-specific manifest file for themes
|=== 

The following files are typically not added to your VCS.
[cols="15,85"]
|=== 
| *Extension*| *Description*
| .lps| Lazarus project settings file. Created by Lazarus for every new project.
| .lrs| Lazarus resource file.
| .compiled| FPC compilation state
| .o| Object file
| .or| Object file
| .ppu| A compiled Unit file
| .res| The result of compiling the rc file (binary)
| .rst| Compiled resource strings. Used for L10n. If you intend to translate an application, this should probably be version controlled
|===

== Settings (configuration)
To be completed...

// create PDF by running asciidoctor-pdf filename.adoc


== Asciidoc snippets (not part of this document)
This document iss typeset using http://asciidoc.org[AsciiDoc].
There are some snippets I may want to use later on this page, nothing to do with Object Pascal.

A paragraph followed by a simple list with square bullets.

.A bulleted list (square bullets)
[square]
* item
* item 

//-

.Another list
* item 
* item 
** item 
** item
- item
- item

.Start the below list numbered from 88
[start=88]
. Step four
. Step five
. Step six

Hard drive:: Permanent storage for operating system and/or user files
RAM:: Temporarily stores information the CPU uses during operation
Monitor:: Displays information in visual form using text and graphics

.Another list
. something
. something
.. something
... something
. something
 
.Topic Title                                               
[[yourId]]                                                 
//[yourstyle]                                                
____
Example of a quote and using cross-references.
____
You refer to the above by referencing <<yourId>>.

ifdef::env-github[]
:tip-caption: :bulb:
:note-caption: :information_source:
:important-caption: :heavy_exclamation_mark:
:caution-caption: :fire:
:warning-caption: :warning:
endif::[]

[NOTE]
====
A sample note admonition.
We can use gemoji icons in the Asciidoctor markup.
We assign an icon name to the document
attributes `tip-caption`, `note-caption` and `important-caption`.
====

CAUTION: Don't forget to add the `...-caption` document attributes in the header of the document on GitHub.

TIP: It works!

IMPORTANT: Asciidoctor is awesome, don't forget!

WARNING: You have no reason not to use Asciidoctor.
